---
layout: post
title:  Conda, Anaconda, and Anaconda Navigator
category: jekyll
description: intro to why you should be using conda and anaconda
---


# Conda, Anaconda, and Anaconda Navigator

Data scientists should spend their time running models, creating visualizations, and generating insights. But all too often, data scientists are bogged down in a series of tasks that detract from their work:

(1) Installing, updating, and keeping track of installed packages
(2) Making sure software packages work well together (dependency resolution)
(3) Working on multiple projects, each with its own set of packages, dependencies (Python or non-Python, e.g. bzip2), and versions of Python

## conda

Conda provides a single, simple solution to these problems. **Conda is a cross-platform, language-agnostic, command-line package manager**.

What does conda do? First, conda installs and updates packages. Because conda is language-agnostic, you can use conda to download Python packages, R packages, or other command-line utilities (e.g. OpenSSL). Conda also treats Python like a package, so it can install or update different versions of Python.

Second, conda creates isolated environments. Each environment can have its own packages and Python distribution. The packages in each environment are shielded from any other packages and distributions in other environments or installed globally. For each project, conda makes it easy to assemble a collection of packages that work to accomplish a specific analysis or workflow and aren't affected by other software you have installed. Conda works whether you're using Windows, Mac, or Linux.

Many data scientists are already familiar with tools that provide similar functionality. For example, pip is a common utility for installing Python packages at the command line. Virtualenv can be used to create different environments. How does conda differ from these other utilities?

Pip, Python's package manager, is specific to Python, so it can only be used to install and manage Python packages. Conda, in contrast, is language-agnostic, and can be used to install R packages and other command-line dependencies. Unlike conda, pip cannot install or update Python. Pip also does not create and manage isolated environments, which is the goal of virtualenv. Unlike conda, virtualenv requires an existing installation of Python. In conda, you can create a new environment and install any version of Python. Additionally, virtualenv does not recognize non-Python packages like conda does. In short, conda combines the best features of pip and virtualenv while being a more general solution. conda is used to manage and install packages like pip, but also to manage isolated environments like virtualenv.

### Anaconda Navigator

For users that don't love living in their terminal, there's Anaconda Navigator. Navigator is a point-and-click alternative to using conda directly. Under the hood, Anaconda Navigator uses conda, it just provides an easy user experience. This means you can install, upgrade, and remove packages, as well as create, manage, and remove isolated conda environments.


### Anaconda and Miniconda

Often, when testing things out or trying a new analysis, a data scientist may want a convenient environment that contains all the popular scientific, math, and data analysis packages she is likely to use. Pip users would have to catalogue and download each package piecemeal, which can be a significant time investment.

Enter Anaconda. Anaconda is an easy, out-of-the-box distribution of conda, Python, R, and 150 common packages that data scientists are likely to use in their workflows. All packages are installed at once and can be updated in a single command.

Anaconda comes with a lot of packages that can take up a lot of disk space.
For those that want a leaner distribution, there’s Miniconda. Miniconda comes with conda, Python and a smaller number of essential packages. Miniconda uses will likely have to install conda packages as they work on an analysis, but using Miniconda is a good option when disk space is a concern.


## recap

Here's a quick recap on the advantages of using conda and Anaconda / Miniconda:

- Create isolated environments with packages that work well together
- Flexibility to install multiple versions of Python, packages, dependencies
- Install and manage non-Python dependencies and packages (R packages, other command line utilities)
- Anaconda and Miniconda provide self-contained distributions with basic packages to get you started doing cool data science projects


## terminology:

#### Conda
- A cross-platform, language-agnostic package manager. Can also be used to create isolated environments for working on separate projects that require different packages, versions, dependencies, etc. Conda is a command line interface (CLI) in contrast to Anaconda Navigator, which is a point-and-click graphical user interface (GUI)
- It is: a package manager
- It is not: a python distribution; specific to Python

#### Anaconda
- A distribution of Python, R, conda, and 100+ packages
- It is: a distribution of Python, R
- It is not: a package manager

#### Miniconda
- Anaconda-lite. Includes Python, conda, and a smaller subset of essential Python packages

#### Anaconda Navigator
- An alternative to using conda at the command line, Anaconda Navigator is a graphical user interface used to manage packages and environments.
